once around Ultima
THU well this all starts with the New
Horizon's mission to Pluto sent out
there by NASA to do a flyby of Pluto and
Sharon in 2015 and take some fantastic
images and did lots of other work as
well discovered that there were more
satellites out there more moons of Pluto
and uh Pluto was a really surprising
world and it was all made possible
because NASA had an extra lump of
plutonium to use as a power source left
over from the Cassini mission that flew
to
Saturn but the question was having
visited the Pluto system and taken those
marvelous images and sent them back home
to Earth for analysis what do you do
with the
spacecraft it was going extremely fast
it had done a flyby of Jupiter to pick
up a gravity assist on its way out to
the outer so system and was the fastest
moving object that mankind had ever made
up to that
point so it couldn't stop it hadn't got
the fuel to slow down and go into orbit
around Pluto or really do anything but
keep going in a pretty much a straight
line um it couldn't have gone and
explored any of the other coer belt
objects like Aris or hame or any of the
other big ones that we knew about
because because they were around the
other side of the solar system so the
question was could we find anything else
that it could possibly go and visit just
using the little bit of spare fuel that
it had left and so a search for
potential targets was set
up now the Hubble Space Telescope had
discovered this one this little tiny
moving dot which has got the green ring
around it for your convenience um in a
series of images here
not very spectacular but this little
tiny Space Rock was given the
designation 2014 for its year of
Discovery and mu69 the catalog number
for the item during that
year and this was in roughly the right
direction and seemed plausible so this
was given the designation pt1 potential
Target one and in fact I can stop the
motion here for you and show just uh
five frames superimposed on each other
there's pt1 mu69 whizzing across and uh
it's quite a small object they estimate
based on the sort of image and the
brightness here was that it was roughly
30 kilm in diameter so really quite a
tiny object um and somewhat irregular in
shape you can just about make that out
in that image there now in fact there
were several objects there was a pt2 and
a pt3 that were found all in orbits
beyond the uh realm of Neptune out in
the coer belt intersecting roughly with
the outside edge of Pluto's orbit but in
somewhat more circular paths taking just
under 300 years to go right
round and uh well here's the orbit of
pt1 and pt1 was selected so there's the
purple track
going past Pluto and then past pt1 and
it had just enough fuel to allow it to
do that and carry out this close flyby
on the 1st of January
2019 now they held a public
consultation to try and come up with a
name for it and 34,000 different names
were suggested by
115,000 people um but the one that had
the most scored 40 of those and it was
Ultima THU uh THU was a mythical island
in the North Sea that ancient people
thought was present and Ultima THU meant
Beyond THU a mysterious place outside
the known world so this made some sense
for this tiny little uh Outpost of the
solar
system but the problem was trying to pin
it down and plan the flyby for New
Horizons and it was recognized that in
2017 there would be three occasions when
pt1 would pass in front of a star
creating what's called an occultation so
the staright would be blocked and the
star would wink out now because we know
the positions of stars very accurately
we would be able to pin down the exact
position and the exact time of this
event and that would help us to be able
to track the orbit of
PT so that the intercept by New Horizons
could be uh
established so the first attempt was for
the the 3rd of June
2017 and the shadow the occultation
shadow of this star would be detectable
from both Argentina and South Africa and
so teams were sent out to try to spot
the event but I'm afraid they didn't see
anything which was a disappointment
which suggested that perhaps the uh
object was either a a very small or that
it was a swarm of debris rather than a
single solid object um or of course they
were in the wrong place which is the one
that's not listed on there so attempt
number two
two was set
up and that was to use Sophia the flying
infrared Observatory telescope a
converted 747 with a big window on the
side that had an infrared telescope and
being infrared it could be extremely
successful at high altitude and that's
the whole point of the flying
Observatory to get above all the clouds
and all the water vapor and the reason
that they used this was because the
intercept point was over the Pacific so
this flew out from New Zealand and tried
to intersect the proposed track for this
occultation and they didn't think they'd
found it until later when they got home
they found a very brief dip in the light
just at the end of the uh observations
so they almost missed it but having just
caught it that enabled them to be uh
better armed for the third and final
attempt at an occultation seven days
later and that was only visible in
Argentina but this time they took no
chances they took 24 of these dobsonian
telescopes 16in dobsonian telescopes uh
much beloved of amateur astronomers
actually these devices and uh they set
them up in a trap a fence line the
picket line across the projected line of
advance of the
occultation um and having spread them
out over 4 and a half kilometers they
were pretty sure that the eclipse was
going to occur the occultation was going
to be visible from one of the telescopes
uh regardless of the accuracy and this
would help enormously and it did indeed
work they caught it five of the
telescopes actually caught a dip in the
light and the white lines are the tracks
of the star going across the field of
the individual
telescopes laid out in the pattern that
they were
deployed and what you can see is that at
certain time the light disappeared from
the second one from the top and then
reappeared again it was blocked for
longer for the ones below that and then
final one at the bottom there was no
blockage at all
and so what this suggests is that
actually the shape was roughly what is
shown there with those two circular
outlines uh which could be made to fit
the uh observations there so here's the
actual detection you have to watch very
closely but the star in the middle
suddenly disappears here it goes there
it's gone and back again that's just a
video taken by one of the
telescopes and
uh with that you definitely get this
idea that it's a two
lobed object um sandwich together
perhaps 12 kilm and 11 18 kilometer and
that shape would not be unusual because
if I superimpose on there the image of
comet 67p churny manof gasim menco that
the Rosetta Mission went to and orbited
around it well you can see that's the
sort of two scoops of ice cream joined
together structure of a comet nucleus
and this seems to fit the idea
reasonably
well so armed with the orbital data nice
and accurate as a result of these
observations they were able to Target
New Horizons towards it and on 16th of
August 2018 from 172 million kilometers
away we got these images here uh with
two different cameras showing the object
now the reason there are so many
background objects is that this
direction was the direction of the star
clouds of Sagittarius so this was not an
easy thing because there were an awful
lot of other stars in the background
because we're heading straight towards
the Bulge of the Milky Way galaxy in
this direction and uh so absolutely
packed with star images so you had to
try and pick out the one that was moving
but of course the spacecraft is moving
as well so fairly
tricky anyway at 5:30 in the morning on
the 1st of January of
2019 the flyby occurred and it was just
three and a half kilometers above the
surface giving a pretty good resolution
with a pixel being a 30 m
Square um now at this distance just over
43 astronomical units well beyond the
orbit of both Neptune and Pluto the uh
light travel time is 6 hours so it
wasn't until 11:30 in the morning before
the data arrived to say that the
spacecraft had completed the flyby and
it then started dribbling back its data
over a very tenuous radio link at that
distance um and in fact the whole data
down link took a year but uh the first
image to come in was spectacular and
this is it this was taken as it was
approaching and it was at just a
distance of 85,000 miles now um now
that's a something that New Horizons
would accomplish that distance in two
hours so had it smashed into the the
object we would never have known because
uh it would have been a bit of a problem
with sending the data back but anyway
indeed it confirmed this double lobe
structure of the object so uh confirmed
what that occultation data had been
interpreted
as and as the uh flyby went on we got a
whole series of images of the object
rotating there's a animation and a
series of frames there to show it and
you can see how the animation actually
gets noticeably more detailed as it
spins around that's because was getting
so much closer during that time um so uh
the resolution is going up as New
Horizons is hurtling towards the
target here it is uh just rocking
backwards and forwards um just a a pair
of frames uh again with quite good
detail on them and you can see some
interesting features already there with
the neck and some brighter marks and
some curved lines and so on here it is
as a single frame
of one of the highest resolution
photographs so you can see the double
lobe there's a big crater on the top on
the smaller lobe and then there are some
sort of circular markings on the main
body and with the combination of these
images it was possible to work out
really that the shape is not two spheres
as had originally been suspected but
it's actually quite flattened objects
one very flat disc and another slightly
fatter disc just touching giving us that
uh interesting shape and what we think
is happened is that uh during the early
days of the solar system so over four
billion years ago material out in the
coer belt was whizzing around and
gravity was gradually coalescing the
lumps together sticking them and
building larger and larger pieces larger
pieces have stronger gravity and they
will attract more objects and So
eventually we ended up with these two
objects and then they spiral together
and became what's called a contact
binary still spinning around the center
of
mass um and
the reason that the orbits spiral in is
because of the combination of tidal
effects collisions with other smaller
bodies and drag from just the rest of
the G G and debris that the objects were
moving through at the time in the early
formation stage of the solar system and
so we ended up with this uh ra two
rather flattened discs Each of which had
just come into contact and stuck um and
so you've got this very peculiar and
very interesting shape now you can see
some features on that there image there
but if we have a look at a an image and
a colorized image picking out the
details based on spectroscopy data so
not just pure color but looking at the
different wavelength absorption and
emission features in the spectrum of the
light we find that these uh objects are
indeed made up of a number of regions
and so these are early building blocks
that underwent earlier collisions and
then got squeezed together um and the
whole thing looks like it's been made
out of a number of sections of
plasticine or blue Tac um and pushed
together which is not actually a very uh
wrong impression of it because this is
quite a icer icy low density body with
not a lot of strength so even with just
its modest gravity it can uh pull these
rocks and start to uh form them into
this uh dis
shapes and that confirmed a lot of our
theories about how these outer solar
system bodies formed and indeed how the
cause of the asteroids and the planets
probably formed in the inner solar
system by this accretion into lumps and
the lumps then accreting to each other
and building larger and larger
bodies and I just got one more shot for
you which is The Parting Shot animation
taken by Ultima ultimate thol now
renamed
aroco um and uh that's it's now its
formal name so they abandoned the use of
uh Ultima or pt1 or
mu69 uh and this is taken by the New
Horizon spacecraft as it was
disappearing off out now we I'm not sure
that we've heard the last of New
Horizons because there is the
possibility that it's still has a little
bit of fuel and just the other day there
was an announcement that they were
considering trying to Target it on yet
another object so that would be really
interesting and uh with that thanks very
much for listening